Hello everyone and welcome to part 7 for loops.
So we're going to be learning about the most basic for loop in javascript and this lecture.
And if you've only dealt with for loops in Python before you may actually want to watch this lecture
instead of just reading notes because the syntax for a for loop or basic for loop in javascript is going
to appear quite different to you versus Python's for loop.
OK so what is a for loop.
Well a for loop allows you to continually execute code usually a specific number of times or linked
to the elements in a sequence.
Now Javascript has three types of four loops it has its most basic for loop which just iterates through
some block of code a certain number of times that it has to for in construct which loops through a javascript
object and a javascript object is a data structure in javascript that we haven't covered yet.
And then there's also the form of loop which is used with Javascript the race which again is another
data structure.
We haven't actually covered yet.
So until we cover those we'll leave for loops in four of loops.
Aside for now and as a quick note previously we use the notation Nahm is equal to plus one when during
a loop we want it to increment the variable number by just one.
There's also two other ways of writing that.
And that is numb plus equal to 1 or nonplus plus.
And if you want to subtract 1 you would just say no minus equals 1 or minus minus.
So these are all the same.
All three of these statements are doing the exact same thing.
That's just a heads up because of javascript.
The most common one you'll see is the very last one numb plus plus.
All right.
This is what the most basic version of a for loop in javascript looks like.
You have your four keyword statement and then you have three other statements separated by semi-colons
inside of parentheses and inside the brackets you execute some code for the for loop.
So let's actually describe Well each of these statements represents and we'll show you an example as
we go along.
So statement 1 is executed before the loop.
Or that could block even begins and that could be something like the find the variable i is equal to
zero.
Well I can think of that similar to the While loop where we just said something like Nahm is equal to
zero or x is equal to zero.
So Statement 1 is executed before the loop even really starts.
Then we have statement 2 which is there in the middle and statement to the finds the condition for running
the loop.
And in this case we can almost think of this for loop.
There's just another syntax way of writing a while loop.
So what's an example of that while statement 2 could be something like this.
Well I'm less than five.
So here we can see we're almost just rewriting a while loop inside of this force statement.
We're starting off with the variable I's equal to zero and we're saying keep running this loop while
I's less than five.
And then finally statement 3 is what is executed each time after the loop cycles through once.
So just like a while loop we saw earlier we may want to incrementally add.
So here with this for missing is start off with the variable.
Isaac bizzarro and while I have less than 5 you some code.
And then every cycle you're going to add one to I or I plus plus.
All right.
So let's see some examples of for loops in the editor.
All right so here's my editor and I have my browser of my console open and it's linked just as we've
done in previous lectures.
Let's start off with the most basic correlate that we initially discussed.
So again I'm going to say something like for an EQ and actually hit enter here.
Note that Adam gives you the three options the four four in and then four of will start with just the
most basic four.
We hit enter what's really nice is Adam takes care of a lot of the stuff right now.
It takes care of statement 1 that initialization of a variable takes care statement 2 which is what
we actually want to run through and the while condition and then plus plus or statement 3 we want to
happen after every time this is run.
Now let's actually change the array that length to just be less than five and we're going to say
the log number is and then we'll concatenate it with I.
So let's save this and actually run this here.
And here you can see numbers 0 1 2 3 and 4.
You can see this is basically just another way of rewriting a 4 or excuse me a while loop.
We have some initial condition the while condition and then what we want to do after every time this
loop run in like I mentioned earlier.
This plus plus is just another way of writing eyes equal to I plus one I can save that and if I refresh
or get the exact same result.
And another note is that this doesn't actually have to be.
I could call this whatever you want.
So you could say variable num While numbers is less than five we could say nonplus plus right as them
save this we refresh or we get the exact same result.
It's most commonly used for I.
So keep that in mind you'll see a lot but sometimes it might be helpful to you to rename it if it helps
the readability of your code.
But more often than not you're going to see it as I and it so often I that that's why Adam text editor
auto fills it to be I OK.
So let's continue on with another example.
We're going to create a variable called Word and let's just have it be the first few letters of the
alphabet A B C D E F G H I J K OK.
And then I'll start typing for enter and I usually say four I's equal to zero.
I array that length and added text editor actually auto highlights array for me to change it to something.
So I will change it to Word and you can see that it's actually auto filling that in for me.
Inside the for loop which is quite nice and I'm going to log this so I will say LMG lips.
Let me click somewhere in the activate that and then we'll say log in I'm going to input word indexed
at that location case let's say this.
Now what do you think is going to happen here.
Take some time.
So it will refresh and we see here.
Now we get ABC the AFGE all the way to Cape.
So again this is just a way of kind of rewriting the while loop.
So we are equal to zero and will I's less than the length of the actual word he incrementing I and then
print out the index location.
ABC etc..
Right now let's show you another example where let's say you wanted to skip every other letter or something
to make that obvious.
I'll do something like this A B B B B A B A B.
And then I'll write a for loop here.
And I'm going to keep most things the same except over here where it says I.
Plus plus I can do something like icicle 2 I plus two armlets this again.
Put that site.
And now what do you think is going to happen when I refresh this page.
Well I can see a printed out five times and if something is repeatedly put into the console a Google
Chrome will actually just put a little number here next to it.
Instead of flooding your screen with repeated code or repeat the output.
So this little number here represents that a whisper put out five times which makes sense because if
you look at this we have 1 2 3 4 5 A's in that word.
So you can see here it doesn't have to just increment by one increment by any number you want or you
can even go down it can decrease.
OK so that's all we need to know about for loops and Javascript for now.
Coming up next we're going to do a quick exercise just to practice your understanding.
Well see at the next lecture.